[DOCS] Risk score enhancements (#2580)
elastic/security-docs: docs/experimental-features/host-risk-score.asciidoc

TIP: You can also enable import host risk score dashboards in {kib} to analyze host risk score data. To learn how, refer to <<import-host-risk-score-dashboard>> in this topic. 

To enable host risk score from the Entity Analytics dashboard: 

. In the {security-app}, go to *Dashboards* -> *Entity Analytics*. 
. In the Host Risk Scores section, click *Enable* to install the module. 

To enable host risk score from the Hosts page: 

. Go to *Explore* -> *Hosts*. 
. Select the *Host risk* tab, then click *Enable* to install the module. 

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/enable-hrs.png[Enable Host Risk Score button]

To enable host risk score from a host's details page: 

. Go to *Explore* -> *Hosts*. 
. Select the *All hosts* tab, then click a host name. 
. On the details page, scroll down to the data tables, then select the *Host risk* tab. 
. Click *Enable* to install the module. 

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/enable-hrs-details-pg.gif[Shows how to enable host risk score from the host's details page]

To enable host risk score from Dev Tools in {kib}, open a browser window and enter the following URL:

[source,console]
----------------------------------

> {KibanaURL}/s/{spaceID}/app/dev_tools#/console?load_from={KibanaURL}/s/{spaceID}/internal/risk_score/prebuilt_content/dev_tool/enable_user_risk_score

Reviewer: The url above is for enable user risk score, should be: {KibanaURL}/s/{spaceID}/app/dev_tools#/console?load_from={KibanaURL}/s/{spaceID}/internal/risk_score/prebuilt_content/dev_tool/enable_**host**_risk_score

Please let user know that the content will be **appended** to the dev tools, which means if users have existing content in the dev tool, they'll have to **scroll to the bottom** of the dev tools.

----------------------------------

> NOTE: After enabling host risk score, you may get a message that says, "No host risk score data available to display." You may need to wait about an hour for data to be generated, or you can click *Restart* to force host risk score calculations to run immediately. 

Reviewer: This maybe the part that users think this is a bug, as even users click on restart, there's no guarantee that the data will be displayed immediately. Could we rephrase a here?
Could we add more trouble shooting steps: https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/issues/2477#issuecomment-1255191055

[[upgrade-host-risk-score]]
[discrete]
=== Upgrade host risk score 

> If you previously enabled host risk score in {stack} versions 8.4 and earlier and are upgrading to version 8.5 or later, there'll be an option to "upgrade" host risk score instead of enabling it. 

Author: Got it -- I'll just say "if you previously enabled host risk score and are upgrading to 8.5..."

Before upgrading, be mindful of the following: 

* Previous host risk scores are deleted since the older data is not preserved, and new scores are created. However, if you want to retain the old host risk scores, you'll need to reindex the data _before_ upgrading the feature. Your data will then be stored in the `ml_{host|user}_risk_score_{spaceId}` and `ml_${host|user}_risk_score_latest_{spaceID}` indices. To learn how to do this, refer to {ref}/docs-reindex.html[Reindex API]. 

* You must edit your {cloud}/ec-manage-kibana-settings.html#ec-manage-kibana-settings[{kib} user settings] and remove the `xpack.securitySolution.enableExperimental:['riskyHostsEnabled']` feature flag. 

After this is done, you can proceed with upgrading the host risk score feature from any of the following places in the {security-app}:

* The Entity Analytics dashboard 
* The *Host risk* tab on the Hosts page
* The *Host risk* tab on a host's details page

[[import-host-risk-score-dashboard]]
[discrete]

> === Import the host risk score dashboard (Optional)

Reviewer: The dashboards will be automatically imported during upgrade / installation process, so there's no need for users import dashboards manually. I'd recommend to re-name `Import the host risk score dashboard` to something like Explore the host risk score dashboard

To enable host risk score from the Entity Analytics dashboard: 

. In the {security-app}, go to *Dashboards* -> *Entity Analytics*. 
. In the Host Risk Scores section, click *Enable* to install the module. 

To enable host risk score from the Hosts page: 

. Go to *Explore* -> *Hosts*. 
. Select the *Host risk* tab, then click *Enable* to install the module. 

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/enable-hrs.png[Enable Host Risk Score button]

To enable host risk score from a host's details page: 

. Go to *Explore* -> *Hosts*. 
. Select the *All hosts* tab, then click a host name. 
. On the details page, scroll down to the data tables, then select the *Host risk* tab. 
. Click *Enable* to install the module. 

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/enable-hrs-details-pg.gif[Enable host risk score from the host's details page]

To enable host risk score from Console in {kib}, open a browser window and enter the following URL:

[source,console]
----------------------------------
{KibanaURL}/s/{spaceID}/app/dev_tools#/console?load_from={KibanaURL}/s/{spaceID}/internal/risk_score/prebuilt_content/dev_tool/enable_host_risk_score
----------------------------------

> NOTE: If you have existing content in Console, scroll to the bottom, then paste the content. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: If you have existing content in Console, scroll to the bottom and you will find the content loaded below the existing content.
```

Reviewer: The script for installing host risk score will be appended to the console

[[upgrade-host-risk-score]]
[discrete]
=== Upgrade host risk score 

If you previously enabled host risk score and are upgrading to {stack} version 8.5 or later, there'll be an option to "upgrade" host risk score instead of enabling it. 

Before upgrading, be mindful of the following: 

* Since older data is not preserved, previous host risk scores will be deleted and new scores will be created. However, if you want to retain the old host risk scores, you'll need to reindex the data _before_ upgrading the feature. To learn how to do this, refer to {ref}/docs-reindex.html[Reindex API]. New data will be stored in the `ml_host_risk_score_<space-id>` and `ml_host_risk_score_latest_<space-id>` indices. 

> * You must edit your {cloud}/ec-manage-kibana-settings.html#ec-manage-kibana-settings[{kib} user settings] and remove the `xpack.securitySolution.enableExperimental:['riskyHostsEnabled']` feature flag. 

Reviewer 2: The EA feature flag was removed in 8.5 
cc: @machadoum

After this is done, you can proceed with upgrading the host risk score feature from any of the following places in the {security-app}:

* The Entity Analytics dashboard 
* The *Host risk* tab on the Hosts page
* The *Host risk* tab on a host's details page

NOTE: After enabling or upgrading host risk score, you may get a message that says, "No host risk score data available to display." There are additional steps you can take to verify that the transform, which is used to install the host risk score module, is picking up data. To learn how, refer to <<verify-host-risk-score, Verify host risk score data installed successfully>>. 

[[analyze-host-risk-score]]
[discrete]
=== Analyze host risk score data

> It is recommended you analyze hosts with the highest risk scores -- or those in the `Critical` and `Moderate` categories first. Host risk score data appears in the following places in the {security-app}:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We recommend you analyze hosts with the highest risk scores first -- those in the `Critical` and `Moderate` categories. Host risk score data appears in the following places in the {security-app}:
```

The `host.risk.calculated_level` column in the Alerts table:

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/hrs-alerts-table.png[Host risk score in the Alerts table]

The *Overview* tab on the Alert details flyout:

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/score-in-flyout.png[Host risk score in Alert details flyout]

The *Host risk classification* column in the All hosts table on the Hosts page:

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/hrs-all-hosts.png[Host risk score on the Hosts page]

The *Hosts by risk* tab on the Hosts page:

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/hosts-by-risk-tab.png[Host risk score on the host details page]

The Overview section on the host details page:

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/hrs-overview-section.png[Host risk score in Overview section]

> The *Hosts by risk* tab on the host details page:

Author: Good catch -- this was a UI change I missed, thanks!

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/hosts-by-risk-details-page.png[Host risk score on the Hosts by risk tab]

You can also visualize host risk score data using prebuilt dashboards that are automatically imported once the feature is enabled. 

To access the dashboards:

. In {kib}, go to *Analytics* -> *Dashboard*, then search for `risk score`.
. Select *Drilldown of Host Risk Score* to drill down further into risk components of a particular host, or *Current Risk Score for Hosts* to display a list of current risky hosts in your environment.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/select-hrs-dashboard.png[Select host risk score dashboard]

In this example, we'll explore the *Drilldown of Host Risk Score* dashboard.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/full-dashboard.png[Shows dashboard]

> Use the histogram to track how the risk score for a particular host has changed over time. To specify a date range, use the date and time picker, or drag and select a time range within the histogram.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The histogram shows historical changes in a particular host's or group of hosts' risk score(s). To specify a date range, use the date and time picker, or drag and select a time range within the histogram.
```
In the screenshot the histogram is labeled "cumulative host risk score (multiple hosts)"

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/histogram.png[]

> To go to the host's details page, left-click any host's corresponding bar in the histogram, then select *Go to Host View*.

Reviewer 4: Usually not necessary to say "left-click" since it's assumed to just be regular "click"

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/go-to-host-view.png[]

> The data tables beneath the histogram display associated rules, users, and MITRE ATT&CK tactics seen on risky hosts. The table data is sorted in reverse chronological order by default, with the highest total risk score at the top. Use this information to triage hosts with the highest risk in your network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The data tables beneath the histogram display associated rules, users, and MITRE ATT&CK tactics seen on risky hosts. By default, the tables are sorted by risk, with the highest total risk scores at the top. Use this information to triage your highest risk hosts.
```
Maybe I'm missing something, but in the screenshots I'm not seeing anything chronological.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/data-tables.png[]

[[verify-host-risk-score]]
=== Verify host risk score data installed successfully (Optional)

After enabling or upgrading host risk score, you may get the following message in the UI: 

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/restart-hrs.png[Restart host risk score]

If so, click *Restart* and allow at least an hour for the data to be generated. If you still don't see any data, verify that host risk score data has been generated:

In {kib}, run the following commands in Console to query the `ml_host_risk_score_<space-id>` index: 

[source,console]
----------------------------------
GET ml_host_risk_score_<space-id>/_search
----------------------------------

If no data returns, you'll need to check if the alerts index (.`alerts-security.alerts-<space-id>`) had alert data when `ml_hostriskscore_pivot_transform_<space-id>` was started.

Example:

[source,console]
----------------------------------

> GET transform/ml_hostriskscore_pivot_transform_default/_stats?human=true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GET transform/ml_hostriskscore_pivot_transform_<space-id>/_stats?human=true
```

        "search_time_in_ms": 201,
        "search_total": 29,
        "search_failures": 0,
        "processing_time_in_ms": 14,
        "processing_total": 29,
        "delete_time_in_ms": 0,
        "exponential_avg_checkpoint_duration_ms": 59.02353261024906,
        "exponential_avg_documents_indexed": 0.8762710605864747,
        "exponential_avg_documents_processed": 1664.7724779548555
      },
      "checkpointing": {
        "last": {
          "checkpoint": 8,
          "timestamp": "2022-10-17T14:49:50.315Z",
          "timestamp_millis": 1666018190315,
          "time_upper_bound": "2022-10-17T14:47:50.315Z",
          "time_upper_bound_millis": 1666018070315
        },
        "operations_behind": 380,
        "changes_last_detected_at_string": "2022-10-17T14:49:50.113Z",
        "changes_last_detected_at": 1666018190113,
        "last_search_time_string": "2022-10-17T14:49:50.113Z",
        "last_search_time": 1666018190113
      }
    }
  ]
}
----------------------------------

Take note of the value from `time_upper_bound_millis` and enter it as a range query for the alerts index. 

Example:

[source,console]
----------------------------------

> GET .alerts-security.alerts-default/_search

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GET .alerts-security.alerts-<space-id>/_search
```

{
  "query": {
    "range": {
      "@timestamp": {
        "lt": 1666018070315
      }
    }
  }
}
----------------------------------

> If there's no response, verify that relevant <<rules-ui-management, rules>> are running and that alert data is being generated. If so, allow an hour for the host risk data to appear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there's no response, verify that relevant <<rules-ui-management, rules>> are running and that alert data is being generated. If there's response, click the restart button and allow an hour for the host risk data to appear.
```

|==============================================

[[enable-host-risk-score]]
[discrete]
=== Enable host risk score

NOTE: To enable the host risk score feature, you must have alerts in your environment. If you previously enabled host risk score and are upgrading the {stack} to 8.5 or newer, refer to <<upgrade-host-risk-score>> in this topic. 

> You can enable host risk score from the following places in the  {security-app}:

Reviewer 5: @angorayc @SourinPaul Do we want to have multiple places for users to enable host risk score? I was under the impression that we were switching over to only enabling via the centralized EA page starting 8.6.

Reviewer: We share the same UI of enabling / upgrading the module across all the pages, so it's true that in 8.5 users can enable risk score from multiple pages.

* The Entity Analytics dashboard 
* The *Host risk* tab on the Hosts page
* The *Host risk* tab on a host's details page

> Or, in {kib}, you can enable host risk score in Console. 

Reviewer 5: @angorayc @SourinPaul  Do we still want to point users to the Dev Tools installation?

Reviewer 2: @ajosh0504 Only keep this as a reference in the documentation for 8.5. If I recall, @angorayc suggestion was to retain this as a backup mechanism given the dashboard enablement is just introduced and we dont have any data from real-life enablement.

I think there is no harm in retaining it unless we are confident of the onboarding process and then remove it from the documentation as well.

Reviewer: I remember in our previous discussion that we wanted to keep enable via dev tools in the doc, but I'm totally agree if we want to remove it in the future.

To enable host risk score from the Hosts page: 

. Go to *Explore* -> *Hosts*. 
. Select the *Host risk* tab, then click *Enable* to install the module. 

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/enable-hrs.png[Enable Host Risk Score button]

To enable host risk score from a host's details page: 

. Go to *Explore* -> *Hosts*. 
. Select the *All hosts* tab, then click a host name. 
. On the details page, scroll down to the data tables, then select the *Host risk* tab. 
. Click *Enable* to install the module. 

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/enable-hrs-details-pg.gif[Enable host risk score from the host's details page]

To enable host risk score from Console in {kib}, open a browser window and enter the following URL:

[source,console]
----------------------------------
{KibanaURL}/s/{spaceID}/app/dev_tools#/console?load_from={KibanaURL}/s/{spaceID}/internal/risk_score/prebuilt_content/dev_tool/enable_host_risk_score
----------------------------------

NOTE: If you have existing content in Console, scroll to the bottom, then paste the content. 

[[upgrade-host-risk-score]]
[discrete]
=== Upgrade host risk score 

> If you previously enabled host risk score and are upgrading to {stack} version 8.5 or later, there'll be an option to "upgrade" host risk score instead of enabling it. 

Reviewer 5: There's a NOTE above that talks about upgrades too. Might be good to have all the upgrade information in one place?

Before upgrading, be mindful of the following: 

> * Previous host risk scores are deleted since the older data is not preserved, and new scores are created. However, if you want to retain the old host risk scores, you'll need to reindex the data _before_ upgrading the feature. Your data will then be stored in the `ml_host_risk_score_{spaceID}` and `ml_$host_risk_score_latest_{spaceID}` indices. To learn how to do this, refer to {ref}/docs-reindex.html[Reindex API]. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Previous host risk scores will be deleted since the older data is not preserved, and new scores are created. However, if you want to retain the old host risk scores, you'll need to reindex the data _before_ upgrading the feature. To learn how to do this, refer to {ref}/docs-reindex.html[Reindex API]. New data will be stored in the `ml_host_risk_score_{spaceID}` and `ml_host_risk_score_latest_{spaceID}` indices. 
```

* You must edit your {cloud}/ec-manage-kibana-settings.html#ec-manage-kibana-settings[{kib} user settings] and remove the `xpack.securitySolution.enableExperimental:['riskyHostsEnabled']` feature flag. 

After this is done, you can proceed with upgrading the host risk score feature from any of the following places in the {security-app}:

> * The Entity Analytics dashboard 

Reviewer 5: @angorayc @SourinPaul Same question as above- do we want upgrades to happen from multiple places?

Reviewer 2: I think @machadoum has already removed the ability to enable risk scores from the `Host/ User` pages https://github.com/elastic/security-team/issues/5093#issuecomment-1274544910. Maybe the change has not been incorporated in the docs yet. @machadoum @ferenrigue please confirm,

Reviewer 6: On 8.5 we introduced the Enable/Upgrade callout that is displayed on Entity Analytics, Host, and User page.
<img width="1520" alt="Screenshot 2022-10-20 at 09 52 55" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1490444/196889920-ee4c2b79-acfc-4f82-88d1-fc3f9a686fb7.png">
<img width="1520" alt="Screenshot 2022-10-20 at 09 53 05" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1490444/196889924-9e8efa9f-6877-435a-b0b5-507fabca2b40.png">

<img width="1524" alt="Screenshot 2022-10-20 at 09 52 44" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1490444/196889914-8c5e0ea5-93b7-48ef-9c84-66ce7cdd8dfc.png">

Reviewer: If I understand it correctly, the issue above is to remove the callout, so users should still be able to enable / upgrade risk score from multiple pages in 8.5

You can also visualize host risk score data using prebuilt dashboards that are automatically imported once the feature is enabled. 

To access the dashboards:

. In {kib}, go to *Analytics* -> *Dashboard*, then search for `risk score`.
. Select *Drilldown of Host Risk Score* to drill down further into risk components of a particular host, or *Current Risk Score for Hosts* to display a list of current risky hosts in your environment.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/select-hrs-dashboard.png[Select host risk score dashboard]

In this example, we'll explore the *Drilldown of Host Risk Score* dashboard.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/full-dashboard.png[Shows dashboard]

Use the histogram to track how the risk score for a particular host has changed over time. To specify a date range, use the date and time picker, or drag and select a time range within the histogram.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/histogram.png[]

To go to the host's details page, left-click any host's corresponding bar in the histogram, then select *Go to Host View*.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/go-to-host-view.png[]

> The data tables beneath the histogram display associated rules, users, and MITRE ATT&CK tactics of risky hosts. The table data is sorted in reverse chronological order by default, with the highest total risk score at the top. Use this information to triage alerts with the highest risk in your network.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The data tables beneath the histogram display associated rules, users, and MITRE ATT&CK tactics seen on risky hosts. The table data is sorted in reverse chronological order by default, with the highest total risk score at the top. Use this information to triage hosts with the highest risk in your network.
```

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/data-tables.png[]

[[verify-host-risk-score]]
=== Verify host risk score data installed successfully (Optional)

After enabling or upgrading host risk score, you may get the following message in the UI: 

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/restart-hrs.png[Restart host risk score]

> If so, it's recommended you verify that host risk score data has been generated by doing the following:

Reviewer: Could we add this sentence:
If so, please allow an hour for the data to be generated. It's also recommended you verify that host risk score data has been generated by doing the following:

> If so, please allow an hour for the data to be generated. It's also recommended you verify that host risk score data has been generated by doing the following:

Reviewer 5: Please recommend Restart here. And if they still do not see data, only then follow the verification steps.

> In {kib}, run the following commands in Console to query the host risk score index: 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In {kib}, run the following commands in Console to query the `ml_host_risk_score_{spaceID}` index: 
```

[source,console]
----------------------------------

> GET ml_host_risk_score_<space-id>/_search

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
GET ml_host_risk_score_{spaceID}/_search
```

Reviewer 5: For consistency, consider changing any occurrences of <space-id> to {spaceID} or vice versa.

> GET ml_host_risk_score_latest_<space-id>/_search

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

----------------------------------

> If no data returns, you'll need to check if the source index (.`alerts-security.alerts-<space-id>`) has alert data while `ml_hostriskscore_pivot_transform<space-id>` is running.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If no data returns, you'll need to check if the alerts index (.`alerts-security.alerts-{spaceID}`) had alert data when `ml_hostriskscore_pivot_transform_{spaceID}` was started.
```

[source,console]
----------------------------------

> GET _transform/<transform_id>/_stats?human=true

Reviewer: Let's change this to be more straight forward:
GET _transform/ml_hostriskscore_pivot_transform_{{spaceID}}/_stats?human=true

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Example:

```

> GET transform/ml_hostriskscore_pivot_transform<space-id>/_stats?human=true

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
GET transform/ml_hostriskscore_pivot_transform_default/_stats?human=true
```

----------------------------------

Here's an example response: 

[source,console]
----------------------------------
{
  "count": 1,
  "transforms": [
    {

>       "id": "ml_hostriskscore_pivot_transform_default",

Reviewer: "id": "ml_hostriskscore_pivot_transform_{{spaceID}}",

>       "id": "ml_hostriskscore_pivot_transform_<space-id>",

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
      "id": "ml_hostriskscore_pivot_transform_default",
```

        "index_failures": 0,
        "search_time_in_ms": 201,
        "search_total": 29,
        "search_failures": 0,
        "processing_time_in_ms": 14,
        "processing_total": 29,
        "delete_time_in_ms": 0,
        "exponential_avg_checkpoint_duration_ms": 59.02353261024906,
        "exponential_avg_documents_indexed": 0.8762710605864747,
        "exponential_avg_documents_processed": 1664.7724779548555
      },
      "checkpointing": {
        "last": {
          "checkpoint": 8,
          "timestamp": "2022-10-17T14:49:50.315Z",
          "timestamp_millis": 1666018190315,
          "time_upper_bound": "2022-10-17T14:47:50.315Z",
          "time_upper_bound_millis": 1666018070315
        },
        "operations_behind": 380,
        "changes_last_detected_at_string": "2022-10-17T14:49:50.113Z",
        "changes_last_detected_at": 1666018190113,
        "last_search_time_string": "2022-10-17T14:49:50.113Z",
        "last_search_time": 1666018190113
      }
    }
  ]
}
----------------------------------

Take note of the value from `time_upper_bound_millis` and enter it as a range query for the alerts index:

[source,console]
----------------------------------

> GET .alerts-security.alerts-default/_search

Reviewer: GET .alerts-security.alerts-{{spaceID}}/_search

> [source,console]

Reviewer 5: You can probably delete this and only show the example.

{
  "query": {
    "range": {
      "@timestamp": {
        "lt": <time_upper_bound_millis>
      }
    }
  }
}
----------------------------------

Example: 

[source,console]
----------------------------------
GET .alerts-security.alerts-default/_search
{
  "query": {
    "range": {
      "@timestamp": {
        "lt": 1666018070315
      }
    }
  }
}
----------------------------------

> If there's no response, install the user risk module again.

Reviewer: If there's no response, please check the relevant [rules](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/security/current/rules-ui-management.html) are running and alerts data are generated. Otherwise please **restart** the module and allow an hour for the data to be generate.

> If there's no response, verify that relevant <<rules-ui-management, rules>> are running and alert data is generated. If so, restart the module and allow an hour for the data to generate.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If there's no response, verify that relevant <<rules-ui-management, rules>> are running and that alert data is being generated. If so, allow an hour for the host risk data to appear.
```
